blogpost: Gateway API Quickstart with KinD (#53581)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2025-12-11-experimenting-gateway-api-with-kind.md

---
layout: blog
title: "Experimenting with Gateway API using KinD"

> date: 2025-12-11

Reviewer: The scheduling for feature blog should end on Jan 12, so we will schedule this post after this date. 
It's ok to leave this date here since it will be merged as draft first.

draft: true
slug: experimenting-gateway-api-with-kind
evergreen: true
author: >
  [Ricardo Katz](https://github.com/rikatz) (Red Hat)
---

This document will guide you through setting up a local experimental environment with Gateway API on KinD. This setup is designed purely for learning and testing - helping you understand Gateway API concepts without the complexity of a production deployment.

> {{< warning >}}

Author: changed.

> EXPERIMENTAL SETUP - NOT FOR PRODUCTION USE

Author: changed to `This is an experimentation learning setup, and must not be used for production.`

> This is an experimentation learning setup, and must not be used for production.

Reviewer 2: Maybe "should", or explain more about why it's a bad idea.

This is a development and learning environment only. The configuration described 
here is not suitable for production deployments. 
Once you're ready to deploy Gateway API in a production environment, 
select an [implementation](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/implementations/) that suits your needs.
{{< /warning >}}

## Overview

In this guide, you will:

> - Set up a local Kubernetes cluster using KinD (Kubernetes in Docker)

Author: changed everywhere

> - Deploy cloud-provider-kind, which provides both LoadBalancer services and a Gateway API controller

Reviewer 2: nit: Service should have a capital S

> - Deploy cloud-provider-kind, which provides both LoadBalancer services and a Gateway API controller

Author: added, changed Services to have capital S

- Create a Gateway and HTTPRoute to route traffic to a demo application
- Test your Gateway API configuration locally

This setup is ideal for learning, development, and experimentation with Gateway API concepts.

## Prerequisites

Before you begin, ensure you have the following installed on your local machine:

- **[Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/)** - Required to run KinD and cloud-provider-kind
- **[kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/)** - The Kubernetes command-line tool
- **[KinD](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start/#installation)** - Kubernetes in Docker

### Create a KinD Cluster

Create a new KinD cluster by running:

```shell
kind create cluster
```

This will create a single-node Kubernetes cluster running in a Docker container.

### Install cloud-provider-kind

Next, you need [cloud-provider-kind](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cloud-provider-kind/), which provides two key components for this setup:
- A LoadBalancer controller that assigns addresses to LoadBalancer-type Services
- A Gateway API controller that implements the Gateway API specification

> Cloud-provider-kind also automatically installs the Gateway API Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) in your cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It also automatically installs the Gateway API Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) in your cluster.
```

Author: changed locally

> Cloud-provider-kind also automatically installs the Gateway API Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) in your cluster.

Reviewer 3: yeah, sorry, forget to update the docs but we consider gateway api now officially supported in kind, thanks for catching this

> Run cloud-provider-kind as a Docker container on the same host where you created the KinD cluster:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run cloud-provider-kind as a Docker container on the same host where you created the kind cluster:
```

Author: changed locally

```shell
VERSION=$(basename $(curl -s -L -o /dev/null -w '%{url_effective}' https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cloud-provider-kind/releases/latest))
docker run -d --name cloud-provider-kind --rm --network host -v /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock registry.k8s.io/cloud-provider-kind/cloud-controller-manager:${VERSION}
```

**Note:** On some systems, you may need elevated privileges to access the Docker socket.

Verify that cloud-provider-kind is running:

```shell
docker ps --filter name=cloud-provider-kind
```

You should see the container listed and in a running state. You can also check the logs:

```shell
docker logs cloud-provider-kind
```

## Experimenting with Gateway API

Now that your cluster is set up, you can start experimenting with Gateway API resources.

> Cloud-provider-kind automatically provisions a `GatewayClass` called `cloud-provider-kind`. You'll use this class to create your Gateway.

Reviewer 2: nit: don't put backticks around GatewayClass (this is different from what the Gateway API docs do, where they do have bsckticks, but for an article published to this site, we'll follow the Kubernetes project conventions)

> 

Author: added "It is worth noticing that while kind is not a cloud provider, the project is named as `cloud-provider-kind` as it provides features that simulate a cloud-enabled environment."

### Deploy a Gateway

The following manifest will:
- Create a new namespace called `gateway-infra`
- Deploy a `Gateway` that listens on port 80

> - Accept `HTTPRoutes` with hostnames matching the `*.exampledomain.example` pattern

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Deploy a Gateway that listens on port 80
- Accept HTTPRoutes with hostnames matching the `*.exampledomain.example` pattern
```

For publication on this site, I do recommend following the Kubernetes style guide for naming object types.

Author: fixed on my local branch

> - Allow routes from any namespace to attach to the Gateway. **Note**: In real clusters, prefer Same or Selector values on [allowedRoutes namespace selector](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#fromnamespaces) field to limit attachments.

Reviewer 2: I might write:
```suggestion
- Allow routes from any namespace to attach to the Gateway.  
  **Note**: In real clusters, prefer Same or Selector values on the [`allowedRoutes` namespace selector](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#fromnamespaces) field to limit attachments.
```

The trailing whitespace is significant there.

- Allow routes from any namespace to attach to the Gateway

Apply the following manifest:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Namespace
metadata:
  name: gateway-infra
---
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: gateway
  namespace: gateway-infra
spec:
  gatewayClassName: cloud-provider-kind
  listeners:
  - name: default
    hostname: "*.example.tld"
    port: 80
    protocol: HTTP
    allowedRoutes:
      namespaces:

>         from: All

Author: good catch, but should this be part of the manifest or some note below it? People tend to copy/paste the manifest and not really read it

```

> Verify that your Gateway is properly programmed and has an address assigned:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then verify that your Gateway is properly programmed and has an address assigned:
```

```shell
kubectl get gateway -n gateway-infra gateway
```

Expected output:
```
NAME      CLASS                 ADDRESS      PROGRAMMED   AGE
gateway   cloud-provider-kind   172.18.0.3   True         5m6s
```

> The `PROGRAMMED` column should show `True`, and the `ADDRESS` field should contain an IP address.

Author: fixed locally

> ### Deploy a demo Application

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Deploy a demo application
```

Author: fixed locally

Next, deploy a simple echo application that will help you test your Gateway configuration. This application:
- Listens on port 3000
- Echoes back request details including path, headers, and environment variables
- Runs in a namespace called `user`

Apply the following manifest:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Namespace
metadata:
  name: user
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  labels:

>     app: echo

Reviewer 2: even better: 
```suggestion
    app.kubernetes.io/name: echo
```
(and adjust the rest of the page to match)

  name: echo

>   namespace: user

Author: done locally

spec:
  ports:
  - name: http
    port: 3000
    protocol: TCP
    targetPort: 3000
  selector:
    app: echo
  type: ClusterIP
---
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  labels:
    app: echo
  name: echo

>   namespace: user

Author: done locally

spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: echo
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: echo
    spec:
      containers:
      - env:
        - name: POD_NAME
          valueFrom:
            fieldRef:
              apiVersion: v1
              fieldPath: metadata.name
        - name: NAMESPACE
          valueFrom:
            fieldRef:
              apiVersion: v1
              fieldPath: metadata.namespace
        image: registry.k8s.io/gateway-api/echo-basic:v20251204-v1.4.1
        name: echo-basic
```

### Create an HTTPRoute

Now create an `HTTPRoute` to route traffic from your Gateway to the echo application. This HTTPRoute will:

> - Respond to requests for the hostname `some.example.tld`

Author: oh wait, so .example is a valid TLD? 

TIL

- Route traffic to the echo application
- Attach to the Gateway in the `gateway-infra` namespace

Apply the following manifest:

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: echo
  namespace: user
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: gateway
    namespace: gateway-infra
  hostnames: ["some.example.tld"]
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /
    backendRefs:
    - name: echo
      port: 3000
```

> ### Test Your Route

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Test your route
```

> The final step is to test your route using [curl](https://curl.se/). You'll make a request to the Gateway's IP address with the hostname `some.example.tld`:

Reviewer 2: We should list curl in the prerequisites, and then we don't need to hyperlink to it here.

Author: done locally

```shell

> GW_ADDR=$(kubectl get gateway -n gateway-infra gateway -o jsonpath='{.status.addresses[0].value}')

Author: done

curl --resolve some.example.tld:80:${GW_ADDR} http://some.example.tld
```

You should receive a JSON response similar to this:

```json
{
 "path": "/",
 "host": "some.example.tld",
 "method": "GET",
 "proto": "HTTP/1.1",
 "headers": {
  "Accept": [
   "*/*"
  ],
  "User-Agent": [
   "curl/8.15.0"
  ]
 },
 "namespace": "user",
 "ingress": "",
 "service": "",
 "pod": "echo-dc48d7cf8-vs2df"
}
```

If you see this response, congratulations! Your Gateway API setup is working correctly.

## Troubleshooting

If something isn't working as expected, you can troubleshoot by checking the status of your resources.

> ### Check the Gateway Status

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Check the Gateway status
```

Author: changed locally

First, inspect your Gateway resource:

```shell
kubectl get gateway -n gateway-infra gateway -o yaml
```

Look at the `status` section for conditions. Your Gateway should have:
- `Accepted=True` - The Gateway was accepted by the controller

> - `Programmed=True` - The Gateway was successfully configured

Author: changed locally

- `.status.addresses` populated with an IP address

> ### Check the HTTPRoute Status

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Check the HTTPRoute status
```

Author: applied locally

Next, inspect your HTTPRoute:

```shell

> kubectl get httproute -n user echo -o yaml

Author: done

```

Check the `status.parents` section for conditions. Common issues include:

- `ResolvedRefs=False` with reason `BackendNotFound` - The backend Service doesn't exist or has the wrong name
- `Accepted=False` - The route couldn't attach to the Gateway (check namespace permissions or hostname matching)

> Example error when a backend is not found:

Author: I don't follow how is this related with a Gateway Class.

```yaml
status:
  parents:
  - conditions:
    - lastTransitionTime: "2025-12-09T22:13:35Z"
      message: backend not found
      observedGeneration: 2
      reason: BackendNotFound
      status: "False"
      type: ResolvedRefs
    controllerName: kind.sigs.k8s.io/gateway-controller
```

> ### Check Controller Logs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Check controller logs
```

> - `Accepted: False` - The route couldn't attach to the Gateway (check namespace permissions or hostname matching)

Author: fixed locally

>     - lastTransitionTime: "2025-12-09T22:13:35Z"

Reviewer 2: nit: could bump this to early 2026

If the resource statuses don't reveal the issue, check the cloud-provider-kind logs:

```shell
docker logs -f cloud-provider-kind
```

This will show detailed logs from both the LoadBalancer and Gateway API controllers.

## Cleanup

When you're finished with your experiments, you can clean up the resources:

> ### Remove Kubernetes Resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Remove Kubernetes resources
```

Author: applied locally

Delete the namespaces (this will remove all resources within them):

```shell
kubectl delete namespace gateway-infra
kubectl delete namespace user
```

### Stop cloud-provider-kind

Stop and remove the cloud-provider-kind container:

```shell
docker stop cloud-provider-kind
```

**Note:** The container was started with the `--rm` flag, so it will be automatically removed when stopped.

> ### Delete the KinD Cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Delete the kind cluster
```

> **Note:** The container was started with the `--rm` flag, so it will be automatically removed when stopped.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because the container was started with the `--rm` flag, it will be automatically removed when stopped.
```

We have a special shortcode for note callouts, but actually this isn't important enough to call out.

Author: fixed locally

Finally, delete the kind cluster:

```shell
kind delete cluster
```

## Next steps

Now that you've experimented with Gateway API locally, you're ready to explore production-ready implementations:

- **Production Deployments**: Review the [Gateway API implementations](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/implementations/) to find a controller that matches your production requirements
- **Learn More**: Explore the [Gateway API documentation](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/) to learn about advanced features like TLS, traffic splitting, and header manipulation
- **Advanced Routing**: Experiment with path-based routing, header matching, request mirroring and other features following [Gateway API user guides](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/getting-started/)

> **Remember:** This kind setup is for development and learning only. Always use a production-grade Gateway API implementation for real workloads.

Reviewer 2: I might write
```suggestion
### A final word of caution

This _kind_ setup is for development and learning only.
Always use a production-grade Gateway API implementation for real workloads.
```

Author: changed
